---
title: Mathematical Notation 
menu: Mathematical Notation
order: 20
description: "Using MathJax for LaTeX support."
layout: default
---

## Block

If mathematical expressions are needed, use LaTeX syntax in `$$…$$` blocks;[^1] these will be rendered by MathJax in the browser. For example, we can write

```
$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$
```

which will be rendered as 

$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$

## Inline 

Simple mathematical expressions may also be written inline, using `$…$`. For example, `$c^2 = a^2 + b^2$` will be rendered as $c^2 = a^2 + b^2$. Note that a number of LaTeX environments&mdash;particularly for arranging multiple expressions together&mdash;are not supported inline.

## Equation numbering

### Automatic

The _equation_ environment can be used to generate equation numbers automatically, by enclosing an equation in `\begin{equation} … \end{equation}`. For example, we can write _Euler's formula_, using the LaTeX equation environment, as 

```
$$
\begin{equation} e^{ix} = \cos x + i \sin x \end{equation}
$$
```


This is rendered with an automatically generated equation number:

$$
\begin{equation} e^{ix} = \cos x + i \sin x \end{equation}
$$

By default, numbering starts at 1 for the first use of `\begin{equation} … \end{equation}` in a page.

### Manual

Use the `\tag{…}` macro to mark an equation with an explicity specified number or label. For example, we might write the _Euler's identity_ special case of [Euler's formula (above)](#mjx-eqn-1), where $x = \pi$, as 

```
$$
\tag{1a} e^{i\pi} + 1 = 0
$$
```

This will be rendered as

$$
\tag{1a} e^{i\pi} + 1 = 0
$$

### Referencing

To include a reference to a numbered or labeled equation in text, use the `\label{…}` macro to define a referenced equation, then `\eqref{…}` to reference it in text. Note that the references may precede or follow the definitions. For example, we could write the following combination of Markdown and LaTeX.

```
The _logistic map_ equation, shown in $\eqref{logistic map}$, is one of the simplest examples of a non-linear dynamic equation.

$$
\begin{equation} x_{n + 1} = r x_n \left( 1 - x_n \right) \label{logistic map} \end{equation}
$$
```

This is rendered as

The _logistic map_ equation, shown in $\eqref{logistic map}$, is one of the simplest examples of a non-linear dynamic equation.

$$
\begin{equation} x_{n + 1} = r x_n \left( 1 - x_n \right) \label{logistic map} \end{equation}
$$


### Linking

As seen above, the combination of `\label{…}` and `\eqref{…}` results in MathJax inserting a link to the labeled formula. However, the text of the link is always the autogenerated number or explicitly specified tag, enclosed in parentheses: `\eqref{…}` doesn't allow us to specify other text or image to be used in the link; to do that, we need to use HTML or Markdown links. Fortunately, numbered or tagged equations are automatically given HTML `id` attributes by the MathJax processor; this attribute can be used as (among other things) the anchor for intra- and inter-document links in Markdown or HTML.

If the `\label{…}` macro is used then the label forms the basis of the `id`; otherwise, the generated number or explicitly specified tag is used. In any case, the `id` attribute value is `mjx-eqn-`, followed by the label, number, or tag, with any whitespaces replaced by an underscore (`_`).

The following Markdown text includes links to the 3 equations above.

```
* [Euler's formula](#mjx-eqn-1)
* [Euler's identity](#mjx-eqn-1a)
* [Logistic map](#mjx-eqn-logistic_map)
```

This is rendered as

* [Euler's formula](#mjx-eqn-1)
* [Euler's identity](#mjx-eqn-1a)
* [Logistic map](#mjx-eqn-logistic_map)

[^1]: When the intention is to show a computation as expressed in code, a code block (or inline code statement) should be used; otherwise, mathematical notation is preferred.