---
title: Mathematical Notation 
menu: Math
order: 40
description: "Using LaTeX for mathematical expressions."
---

## Overview

When the site content includes mathematical expressions, the choice of how to display them is largely a matter of aim: 

* When the intention is to show a computation as expressed in code of a specific programming language, a fenced code block (or inline code statement) should be used.

* If mathematical equations, formula derivations---or even simple but non-programming-language-specific computations---are needed, mathematical notation should be used. For this purposes, this theme supports the use of $\rm\LaTeX$ expressions embedded in Markdown or HTML content. These will be interpreted and rendered in the browser by the [MathJax](https://www.mathjax.org/) JavaScript library.

## Block

The LaTeX _display_ mode, where one or more LaTeX expressions are displayed on one or more lines, with no non-LaTeX content on those lines, is invoked by enclosing a block of LaTeX code between pairs of `$$` characters. The opening and closing pairs must each be on their own line. 

For example, to show the _quadratic equation_ in display mode, we might write

```tex
$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$
```

which will be rendered as 

$$
x = \frac{-b \pm \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2a}
$$

## Inline 

Simple mathematical expressions may also be written inline, using `$…$`. For example, `$c^2 = a^2 + b^2$` will be rendered as $c^2 = a^2 + b^2$. Note that a number of LaTeX environments---particularly for arranging multiple expressions together---are not supported in inline mode.

## Equation numbering

### Automatic

The _equation_ environment can be used to generate equation numbers automatically, by enclosing an equation in `\begin{equation} … \end{equation}`. For example, we can write _Euler's formula_, using the LaTeX equation environment, as 

```tex
$$
\begin{equation} e^{ix} = \cos x + i \sin x \end{equation}
$$
```

This is rendered with an automatically generated equation number:

$$
\begin{equation} e^{ix} = \cos x + i \sin x \end{equation}
$$

By default, numbering starts at 1 for the first use of `\begin{equation} … \end{equation}` in a page.

### Manual

Use the `\tag{…}` macro to mark an equation with an explicity specified number or label. For example, we might write the _Euler's identity_ special case of [Euler's formula (above)](#mjx-eqn-1), where $x = \pi$, as 

```tex
$$
\tag{1a} e^{i\pi} + 1 = 0
$$
```

This will be rendered as

$$
\tag{1a} e^{i\pi} + 1 = 0
$$

### Referencing

To include a reference to a numbered or labeled equation in text, use the `\label{…}` macro to define a referenced equation, then `\eqref{…}` to reference it in text. Note that the references may precede or follow the definitions. For example, we could write the following combination of Markdown and LaTeX.

```tex
The _logistic map_ equation, shown in $\eqref{logistic map}$, is one of the simplest examples of a non-linear dynamic equation.

$$
\begin{equation} x_{n + 1} = r x_n \left( 1 - x_n \right) \label{logistic map} \end{equation}
$$
```

This is rendered as

The _logistic map_ equation, shown in $\eqref{logistic map}$, is one of the simplest examples of a non-linear dynamic equation.

$$
\begin{equation} x_{n + 1} = r x_n \left( 1 - x_n \right) \label{logistic map} \end{equation}
$$


### Linking

As seen above, the combination of `\label{…}` and `\eqref{…}` results in MathJax inserting a link to the labeled formula. However, the text of the link is always the autogenerated number or explicitly specified tag, enclosed in parentheses: `\eqref{…}` doesn't allow us to specify other text or image to be used in the link; to do that, we need to use HTML or Markdown links. Fortunately, numbered or tagged equations are automatically given HTML `id` attributes by the MathJax processor; this attribute can be used as (among other things) the anchor for intra- and inter-document links in Markdown or HTML.

If the `\label{…}` macro is used then the label forms the basis of the `id`; otherwise, the generated number or explicitly specified tag is used. In any case, the `id` attribute value is `mjx-eqn-`, followed by the label, number, or tag, with any whitespaces replaced by an underscore (`_`).

The following Markdown text includes links to the 3 equations above.

```markdown
* [Euler's formula](#mjx-eqn-1)
* [Euler's identity](#mjx-eqn-1a)
* [Logistic map](#mjx-eqn-logistic_map)
```

This is rendered as

* [Euler's formula](#mjx-eqn-1)
* [Euler's identity](#mjx-eqn-1a)
* [Logistic map](#mjx-eqn-logistic_map)
